Page 1:
Cadavers in Car Safety Research
In 1993, it was widely disclosed that research engineers at Heidelberg University in Germany had used
200 adult and child cadavers in simulated car crash tests. The researchers argued that the use of
human cadavers was necessary to study the actual effects of these crashes on the body. They insisted
that the research would save lives because it would help engineers design safer cars.
There was significant public outcry against this practice from numerous groups. The ADAC, Germany’s
largest automobile club, issued a statement challenging the research on ethical grounds: “In an age
when experiments on animals are being put into question, such tests must be carried out on dummies
and not on children’s cadavers.” Rudolph Hammerschmidt, spokesman for the Roman Catholic German
Bishops’ Conference similarly decried the practice, arguing, “Even the dead possess human
dignity…this research should be done with manikins.” Political leaders also weighed in on the debate.
Klaus von Trotha, research minister of Baden-­‐Wuerttemberg state, questioned the study: “Our
constitution guarantees freedom in scientific research. But the constitution also guarantees the
protection of human dignity.”
The university defended its research by pointing to the results. Dr. Rainer Mattern, the head of
Heidelberg University’s forensic pathology department, responded to public reaction against the use of
child cadavers, arguing, “The tests have saved lives of other children.”
When it was revealed that similar tests were being conducted in the United States at Wayne State
University, some U.S. officials offered their support. George Parker, the associate administrator for
research at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration argued, “We need that type of data to
find out how people are injured in crashes to know what areas of the body are injured under what
conditions.” He added that human subjects were necessary to determine the validity of the data
gathered from crash test dummies: “If you didn’t do this
testing, you wouldn’t know what limits to put on
dummies for crash tests.”
For many, the debate ultimately hinged on whether the
research yielded information not attainable from crash
dummies and whether or not the families gave their
consent to the use of the cadavers.
Case Study – Cadavers in Car Safety Research -­‐ Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. According to those opposing the research, what harm is done by conducting crash tests with
cadavers? According to researchers, what is the harm done by not doing the research?
2. Who are the moral agents involved in this case? Who are the subjects of moral worth? Explain
your reasoning.
3. Do you think the idea of human dignity applies equally to the living and the dead? Why or why
not?
4. To what degree should family members have full capacity to make decisions or give consent on
behalf of their deceased relatives? To what degree should other considerations, such as
communal values or legal restrictions, be taken into account?
5. How does research using cadavers compare to organ donation? Do you think one is more
ethically permissible than the other? Explain your reasoning.
6. How does animal testing compare to this case?
Resources:
German University Said to Use Corpses in Auto Crash Tests
http://www.nytimes.com/1993/11/24/world/german-­‐university-­‐said-­‐to-­‐use-­‐corpses-­‐in-­‐auto-­‐crash-­‐
tests.html
German University Must Prove Families OK’d Tests on Cadavers
http://www.deseretnews.com/article/322514/GERMAN-­‐UNIVERSITY-­‐MUST-­‐PROVE-­‐FAMILIES-­‐OKD-­‐
TESTS-­‐ON-­‐CADAVERS.html?pg=all
Auto Safety Crash Testing Ignites Furor: Germany: The program uses human bodies. U.S. tests using
cadavers at 3 universities are disclosed.
http://articles.latimes.com/1993-­‐11-­‐25/news/mn-­‐60691_1_safety-­‐tests
University Promises to Prove it Had Relatives’ OK to Use Bodies
http://www.apnewsarchive.com/1993/University-­‐Promises-­‐To-­‐Prove-­‐It-­‐Had-­‐Relatives-­‐OK-­‐To-­‐Use-­‐
Bodies/id-­‐fe2ecda0c83ffada0d56c232b3a9433b
Author:
Andrew Carlson, Ph.D., M.F.A.
Department of Theatre & Dance
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Cadavers in Car Safety Research -­‐ Page 2 of 2

