Page 1:
Climate Change & the Paris Deal
In December 2015, representatives from 195 nations gathered in Paris and signed an international
agreement to address climate change, which many observers called a breakthrough for several
reasons. First, the fact that a deal was struck at all was a major accomplishment, given the failure of
previous climate change talks. Second, unlike previous climate change accords that focused exclusively
on developed countries, this pact committed both developed and developing countries to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. However, the voluntary targets established by nations in the Paris climate
deal fall considerably short of what many scientists deem necessary to achieve the stated goal of the
negotiations: limiting the global temperature increase to 2 degrees Celsius. Furthermore, since the
established targets are voluntary, they may be lowered or abandoned due to political resistance, short-­‐
term economic crises, or simply social fatigue or disinterest.
As philosophy professor Stephen Gardiner aptly explains, the challenge of climate change presents the
world with several fundamental ethical dilemmas. It is simultaneously a profoundly global,
intergenerational, and philosophical problem. First, from a global perspective, climate change presents
the world with a collective action problem: all countries have a collective interest in controlling global
carbon emissions. But each individual country also has incentives to over-­‐consume (in this case, to emit
as much carbon as necessary) in response to societal demands for economic growth and prosperity.
Second, as an intergenerational problem, the consequences of actions taken by the current generation
will have the greatest impact on future generations yet to be born. Thus, the current generation must
forego benefits today in order to protect against possibly catastrophic costs in the future. This tradeoff
is particularly difficult for developing countries. They must somehow achieve economic growth in the
present to break out of a persistent cycle of poverty, while limiting the amount of greenhouse gasses
emitted into the atmosphere to protect future generations. The fact that prosperous, developed
countries (such as the U.S. and those in Europe) arguably created the current climate problems during
their previous industrial economic development in the 19th and 20th centuries complicates the
tradeoffs between economic development and preventing further climate change.
Finally, the global and intergenerational nature of climate change points to the underlying
philosophical dimensions of the problem. While it is intuitive that the current generation has some
ethical responsibility to leave an inhabitable world to
future generations, the extent of this obligation is less
clear. The same goes for individual countries who have
pledged to reduce carbon emissions to help protect
environmental health, but then face real economic and
social costs when executing those pledges. Developing
nations faced with these costs may encounter further
challenges as the impact of climate change will most
likely fall disproportionally on the poor, thus also
raising issues of fairness and inequality.
Case Study – Climate Change & the Paris Deal -­‐ Page 1 of 3

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. On the one hand, what harms are potentially produced by failing to take action to control
climate change? On the other hand, what harms are potentially produced by acting to lower
carbon emissions?
2. To what extent do humans have a moral responsibility to future generations that are yet to be
born? Explain your reasoning.
3. Arguably, actions to cut carbon emissions and curb global warming right now have real costs for
certain segments of the global population while the benefits of such actions are more abstract.
How should we balance the tangible costs in the present and abstract consequences in the
future when addressing climate change? Explain.
4. If you were in a position to recommend environmental policy changes or actions, what would
you advocate and why?
5. Do prosperous countries have a greater responsibility to take action and bear more of the costs
of controlling climate change than developing countries? Explain your reasoning.
6. Considering that the negative impacts of climate change will likely fall disproportionally on the
poor, yet developing countries must often increase consumption and emissions to achieve
greater economic growth, do you think developing nations should be exempt from actions to
control climate change? Why or why not?
7. The climate change agreement approved in Paris is based on voluntary goals and pledges by
participating countries. Would it be ethically permissible to impose carbon emission goals on
countries and individuals and enforce them with penalties? Explain your reasoning.
Case Study – Climate Change & the Paris Deal -­‐ Page 2 of 3

Page 3:
Resources:
Nations Approve Landmark Climate Accord in Paris
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/13/world/europe/climate-­‐change-­‐accord-­‐paris.html
Climate Model Predicts West Antarctic Ice Sheet Could Melt Rapidly
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/31/science/global-­‐warming-­‐antarctica-­‐ice-­‐sheet-­‐sea-­‐level-­‐rise.html
What Does a Climate Deal Mean for the World?
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/12/12/science/What-­‐Does-­‐the-­‐Climate-­‐Deal-­‐Mean.html
Peter Singer on the COP21 Agreement and the Ethics of Climate Change
https://www.good.is/articles/peter-­‐singer-­‐climate-­‐cop21-­‐agreement
The Ethical Dimension of Tackling Climate Change
http://e360.yale.edu/feature/the_ethical_dimension_of_tackling_climate_change/2456/
Here’s what political science can tell us about the Paris climate deal
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-­‐cage/wp/2015/12/14/heres-­‐what-­‐political-­‐science-­‐
can-­‐tell-­‐us-­‐about-­‐the-­‐paris-­‐climate-­‐deal/
Authors:
Robert Moser, Ph.D. and Patrick McDonald, Ph.D.
Department of Government
College of Liberal Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Climate Change & the Paris Deal -­‐ Page 3 of 3

