Page 1:
Cover-Up On Campus
Art Briles is without question one of the best high school football coaches in the history of
Texas high school football. Starting as an assistant coach at a small town, his intelligence, drive,
attention to detail, and creativity led him to head coaching jobs at larger and larger schools. He
turned a floundering program at Stephenville High School into a powerhouse that won multiple
state championships and intimidated even much larger high schools’ football teams.
Not without ambition, Briles then took an assistant coaching job at Texas Tech University and
soon became a successful head coach at the University of Houston. Then, he took the top job at
Baylor University. Baylor is an “unambiguously Christian” university. Its website read (at the
time): “In a world where faith is often the casualty of a serious pursuit of academic
achievement, Baylor is a special case.” Baylor’s chancellor and president, Ken Starr, was an
enthusiastic promoter of Christian values. Baylor’s athletic director, Ian McCaw, was described
by former Clemson football coach Tommy Bowden as a “fine Christian man.”
Briles seemed like a good fit for Baylor. As Briles often explains, his Christian faith is very
important to him. A columnist wrote that Briles was “polite, courteous, and respectful in a way
that harkens back to a different era. He is a good man with a good family.” Baylor used its
Christian values, as embodied in its Christian leaders, as a lure to recruit students, and student-
athletes.
In 2008, Briles began as Baylor’s head football coach with the goal of ending a 12-year-string of
losing records. It was a struggle during the first two years. But Briles’ recruiting ability, coaching
acumen, and endless energy soon revived the dormant program. In 2010, Baylor had a winning
record and went to its first of six straight bowl games. Soon after, Baylor became a team that
was annually in the conversation for the nation’s best team. Baylor sent numerous players to
the NFL and their quarterback, Robert Griffin III, won the Heisman trophy.
On the surface, all seemed well on the Baylor campus, especially at its brand-new $266 million
football stadium. The campus was abuzz with energy and excitement over the football team’s
success, which is not surprising in Texas. In 2013, Nick Eatman published Art Briles: Looking Up:
My Journey from Tragedy to Triumph. And in 2014, Briles wrote and published an
autobiography, Beating Goliath: My Story of Football and Faith.
But all was not well on the Baylor campus. In November 2014, Briles published his
autobiography and the football team went 11-
2. Baylor rose to as high as #4 in the national
rankings. The same year, Patty Crawford was
named Baylor’s first full-time Title IX
coordinator. In her first two years in that role,
Crawford received 400 reports of sexual
harassment, violence, and assault. Seventeen
of those victims made complaints of sexual
assault or domestic violence against nineteen
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 1 of 6

Page 2:
football players, including four alleged gang rapes. Crawford said that cases involving football
players involved 10% of her caseload even though football players constituted only 4% of the
student body. Lawsuits later alleged 52 rapes by 31 football players from 2011 to 2014.
According to Paula Lavigne and Mark Schlabach in their book Violated: Exposing Rape at Baylor
University Amid College Football’s Sexual Assault Crisis, Crawford said (regarding the gang
rapes): “…the younger guys saw what was happening and that no one ever got in trouble for it,
and the behavior continued. ‘It was just this weird mentality at Baylor that I haven’t seen
anywhere else.’”
Throughout Briles’ tenure at Baylor, women were assaulted by football players. Not much was
done if these women complained to the university. This, of course, discouraged others from
complaining so the incidents piled up.
The evidence indicates that Baylor’s chancellor Starr was largely unaware of what was going on.
His fault lay primarily in not giving attention to ensuring that Baylor was meeting its Title IX
obligations to police, investigate, and punish such wrongdoing. As president and chancellor, this
was ultimately Starr’s obligation.
Briles mostly claimed ignorance. He apologized to the board of regents for not knowing what
was going on, although there was quite a bit of evidence that he did know. Many students and
parents claimed to have made complaints to the football program. But Briles, who seemed to
have a good memory when he wrote his autobiography, repeatedly said that he had no
memory of complaints, messages, or conversations that victims claimed occurred. But e-mails
and text messages surfaced which showed that Briles often knew of complaints and did his best
to ensure that they were kept quiet rather than alert university officials in the Title IX office as
he was supposed to do. Baylor’s athletic director McCaw sometimes did the same.
In one instance, a football player was arrested for assaulting and threatening to kill a male
student (a non-athlete). In response, Briles and McCaw exchanged these messages:
BRILES: Just talked to [the player]—he said Waco PD was there—said they were going to
keep it quiet—Wasn’t a set up deal… I’ll get shill [Baylor director of football operations
Colin Shillinglaw] to ck on Sibley [a defense attorney often used by Baylor football
players].
McCAW: That would be great if they kept it quiet!
When these cases began showing up in the press, Baylor could no longer play the silent game.
The Board of Regents took charge and hired a law firm, Pepper Hamilton, to investigate. Its
report was not pretty. Among other factual conclusions that the Board reached after reviewing
the Pepper Hamilton report (which it refused to release to the public) were these:
Baylor failed to maintain effective oversight and supervision of the Athletics Department
as it related to the effective implementation of Title IX. Leadership challenges and
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 2 of 6

Page 3:
communication issues hindered enforcement of rules and policies, and created a
cultural perception that football was above the rules….
Baylor failed to take appropriate action to respond to reports of sexual assault and
dating violence reportedly committed by football players. The choices made by football
staff and athletics leadership, in some instances, posed a risk to campus safety and the
integrity of the University. In certain instances, including reports of a sexual assault by
multiple football players, athletics and football personnel affirmatively chose not to
report sexual violence and dating violence to an appropriate administrator outside of
athletics. In those instances, football coaches or staff met directly with a complainant
and/or a parent of a complainant and did not report the misconduct. As a result, no
action was taken to support complainants, fairly and impartially evaluate the conduct
under Title IX, address identified cultural concerns within the football program or
protect campus safety once aware of a potential pattern of sexual violence by multiple
football players.
In addition, some football coaches and staff took improper steps in response to disclosures of
sexual assault or dating violence that precluded the University from fulfilling its legal
obligations. Football staff conducted their own untrained internal inquiries, outside of policy,
which improperly discredited complainants and denied them the right to a fair, impartial and
informed investigation, interim measures or processes promised under University Policy. In
some cases, internal steps gave the illusion of responsiveness to complainants but failed to
provide a meaningful institutional response under Title IX. Further, because reports were not
shared outside of athletics, the University missed critical opportunities to impose appropriate
disciplinary action that would have removed offenders from campus and possibly precluded
future acts of sexual violence against Baylor students. In some instances, the football program
dismissed players for unspecified team violations and assisted them in transferring to other
schools….
In addition to the failures related to sexual assault and dating violence, individuals within the
football program actively sought to maintain internal control over discipline for other forms of
misconduct. Athletics personnel failed to recognize the conflicts of interest in roles and risk to
campus safety by insulating athletes from student conduct processes. Football coaches and
staff took affirmative steps to maintain internal control over discipline of players and to actively
divert cases from the student conduct or criminal processes. In some cases, football coaches
and staff had inappropriate involvement in disciplinary and criminal matters or engaged in
improper conduct that reinforced an overall perception that football was above the rules, and
that there was no culture of accountability for misconduct.
The regents ultimately fired or forced the resignations of Starr, McCaw, and Briles.
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 3 of 6

Page 4:
Discussion Questions:
1. Many friends and family members will swear that Starr, McCaw, and Briles are, indeed,
fine Christian men. Hundreds of former players will swear to coach Briles’ character.
Briles, Starr and McCaw were confident in their conduct. Briles said: “I like the way
we’ve handled [the scandal] as a university, an athletic department, and a football
program.” Yet they, especially Briles and McCaw, seem to have made serious moral
mistakes in their handling of this scandal. Could the overconfidence bias provide a
partial explanation for why these good men made bad decisions? Explain.
a. Could their confidence in their own character and religiosity have subverted
careful moral decision making? Discuss.
2. The video quotes behavioral psychologists Tenbrunsel and Bazerman as writing:
“It’s likely that most of us overestimate our ethicality at one point or another. In effect,
we are unaware of the gap between how ethical we think we are and how ethical we
truly are.”
a. Do you see evidence of that in the Baylor situation? If so, what?
b. Have you seen evidence of it in your own life? Explain.
c. Are you confident of your own moral character?
d. Have you ever made ethical choices that, in retrospect, appear to have been
poor ones? How might you have been subject to the overconfidence bias
yourself?
3. When people focus too much on one part of the picture, other aspects may fade from
view. It seems clear that Starr, McCaw, and Briles were determined to lead Baylor to
football prominence. They correctly surmised that athletic success on the field would
lead to a financial bonanza for the school—new stadiums, new buildings, record alumni
donations. These goals were set and met, but at a terrible price it seems. The moral
standards that should have guided the recruiting of football players and the
investigations into their wrongdoing faded into the background for these three men
who were focused on other accomplishments. Could ethical fading [for a brief definition
of this concept, watch: https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/ethical-fading]
also have played a role in the poor decision making that facilitated this scandal? Explain
your reasoning.
4. When goals conflict, something has to give. In the case of Baylor, it was arguably the
safety and welfare of the campus’s female student population. With Starr, McCaw, and
Briles being single-mindedly committed to attaining football success (and its attendant
benefits), they consciously or unconsciously disregarded and disrespected their
campus’s young women. Explain how conflicts of interest [for a brief definition, watch:
https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/conflict-of-interest] can give rise to poor
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 4 of 6

Page 5:
ethical decision making. Do you think conflicts of interest may have played a role in this
case? If so, how?
5. Most people have a sort of mental scoreboard in their heads where they compare their
image of themselves as good people with their actual deeds. So, when we do something
we’re not exactly proud of, we will often seek opportunities to help others so we can get
our mental scales back in balance. This is called moral compensation. Unfortunately, the
reverse is also true. When we feel we have done especially well, we often give ourselves
permission to do something a little wrong. Our internal moral scoreboard shows a
surplus and we give ourselves permission not to live up to our own moral standards….
just this once. This is called moral licensing. We often see it when high-profile
televangelists are caught profiting from their parishioners’ contributions, or when
“family values” politicians are caught with prostitutes, or (perhaps) when Christian
football coaches are caught excusing the misdeeds of football players they need in order
to win the next game. The coaching team at Baylor had been praised for their many
successes and their representation of good Christian values. Do you think moral
licensing might have played a role in this scandal? If so, how?
a. Have you ever been guilty of moral licensing? Discuss.
6. Neither McCaw nor Briles looked himself in the mirror one morning and said: “To heck
with the safety of young women. I’ve got football games to win.” But human beings are
amazing rationalizers. We are very good at finding reasons not to live up to our own
standards. A common rationalization in the college sports world, and one that was likely
at play at Baylor, is often referred to as altruistic cheating [for a brief definition, watch:
https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/altruistic-cheating]. It doesn’t feel so bad
to cheat or engage in other wrongdoing if we can say to ourselves that we are doing it to
help others and not for purely selfish reasons. Thus, coach Briles could give players a
second chance – players whose conduct had gotten them thrown out of other
universities – by saying: “I feel a duty, a need and a desire to help other people when
things aren’t going their way.” Does the notion of altruistic cheating make sense to you?
a. Could altruistic cheating also have played a part in this scandal? If so, how?
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 5 of 6

Page 6:
Bibliography:
Art Briles & Don Yaeger, Beating Goliath: My Story of Football and Faith (2014).
Nick Eatman, Art Briles: Looking Up: My Journey from Tragedy to Triumph (2013).
Lisa Maria Garza, “Baylor Removes Starr as President, Will Fire Coach Over Rape Case,” New
York Times, May 26, 2016.
Paula Lavigne & Mark Schlabach, Violated: Exposing Rape at Baylor University Amid College
Football’s Sexual Assault Crisis (2017).
Lisa Maria Garza, “Baylor Removes Starr as President, Will Fire Coach Over Rape Case,” New
York Times, May 26, 2016.
Adam Kilgore & Nick Anderson, “Art Briles’s Stunning Ascent Ends in Sudden Disgrace Following
Damning Report,” Washington Post, May 26, 2016.
Paul Newberry, “Baylor Should Pull Plug on Its Athletic Program,” Associated Press, May 26,
2016.
Author:
Robert Prentice, J.D.
Department of Business, Government and Society
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 6 of 6

