Page 1:
Digital Downloads
Copyright laws exist to protect authors’ and publishers’ rights, but also to balance that protection with
access and innovation. In 1999, two teenagers created the file-­‐sharing program Napster. Within its first
year, the service surpassed 20 million users. Many Napster users shared music files with each other,
but without any compensation to the artists and producers who made the music, sparking a series of
legal battles over copyright and distribution. In 2001, an appellate panel upheld a previous ruling that
Napster violated copyright laws, stating that, “Repeated and exploitative unauthorized copies of
copyrighted works were made to save the expense of purchasing authorized copies.”
Artists were divided on the benefits and harms of Napster. Over 70 artists formed “Artists Against
Piracy” in coalition with major record companies to combat the piracy occurring on Napster and other
peer-­‐to-­‐peer internet services. In contrast, some established artists such as Neil Young saw piracy as
the “new radio” and applauded the potential to reach larger audiences and drive additional sales
through increased popularity. Seeing both the benefits and detriments of piracy, singer Norah Jones
stated, “If people hear it I’m happy…it’s great that young people who don’t have a lot of money can
listen to music and be exposed to new things… But I also understand it’s not ideal for the record
industry, and a lot of young artists who won’t make any [money] off their album sales, but at least they
can tour.”
Although court rulings forced Napster to terminate its file-­‐sharing business, Napster’s innovations
stimulated payment-­‐based services, such as iTunes, Pandora, and many others. But the availability of
such services has not put an end to the debate surrounding artist compensation with digital music, as
seen with Taylor Swift’s open letter to Apple in 2015. Swift’s albums, along with the music of many
other artists, were going to be streamed at no cost to new Apple Music customers over the first three
months of service without any compensation to the
artists. In her open letter, Swift stated, “I’m not sure
you know that Apple Music will not be paying
writers, producers, or artists for those three months.
I find it to be shocking, disappointing, and completely
unlike this historically progressive and generous
company.” Within a few hours, Apple responded by
changing the terms of its agreement in order to
compensate artists at a reduced rate.
Case Study – Digital Downloads -­‐ Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. Artists generally agree that piracy causes financial harm, but some artists recognize that piracy
creates exposure for the artist and access for the listener. Do you think the benefits of piracy
outweigh the harms done? Why or why not?
2. Along with other file-­‐sharing services, Napster helped to stimulate payment-­‐based services
such as iTunes, Pandora, and many others. Do you think this positive outcome justifies
Napster’s illegal activities? Why or why not?
3. If Apple had not agreed to compensate artists in response to Swift’s open letter, do you think it
would be ethically questionable to subscribe to their service? Are you, as a consumer, more
likely to subscribe as a result of Apple’s response? Why or why not?
4. In cases of piracy, it is difficult to conceptualize everyone affected. Which of the ten moral rules
(identified by Bernard Gert) does piracy violate? Other than the artists, who else is potentially
affected by piracy? Does a broader view of the people affected and harms caused change your
opinion on piracy? Why or why not?
Resources:
How Taylor Swift Saved Apple Music
http://time.com/3940500/apple-­‐music-­‐taylor-­‐swift-­‐release/
Napster: The Day Music was Set Free
http://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/24/napster-­‐music-­‐free-­‐file-­‐sharing
Ashes to Ashes, Peer to Peer: An Oral History of Napster
http://fortune.com/2013/09/05/ashes-­‐to-­‐ashes-­‐peer-­‐to-­‐peer-­‐an-­‐oral-­‐history-­‐of-­‐napster/
The Napster Decision: The Overview; Appellate Judges Back Limitations on Copying Music
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/02/13/business/napster-­‐decision-­‐overview-­‐appellate-­‐judges-­‐back-­‐
limitations-­‐copying-­‐music.html
Shakira hits back at Lily Allen in illegal downloading row as she claims file-­‐sharing ‘brings me closer to
fans’
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-­‐1221639/Shakira-­‐hits-­‐Lily-­‐Allen-­‐illegal-­‐downloading-­‐
row-­‐claims-­‐file-­‐sharing-­‐brings-­‐closer-­‐fans.html
Author:
Sonia Seeman, Ph.D.
Butler School of Music
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Digital Downloads -­‐ Page 2 of 2

