Page 1:
Freedom vs. Duty in Clinical Social Work
Mental health clinicians are taught to introspect about the degree to which their own background,
culture, values, and beliefs may affect their reactions to their clients, and to strive to maintain
objectivity in the process of assessment, diagnosis, and treatment. Clinical social workers are the
largest professional group providing mental health services in the United States, providing services in
urban and rural outpatient and inpatient settings. Social workers are seen as different from clinical
psychologists, psychiatrists, and other occupational groups that provide therapy in the emphasis that
social work places on social justice, cultural competence, and respect for diversity. According to the
National Association of Social Workers Code of Ethics, the social work profession requires its members
to “act to prevent and eliminate…discrimination against any person, group, or class on the basis of
race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, age, marital status, political belief,
religion, or mental or physical disability.”
An ethical dilemma may arise when the religious or moral beliefs of the social worker interfere with
the duty of all health care professionals to provide optimal service to clients and to “do no harm.” This
issue made national headlines in a related context, when Kim Davis, a clerk in Rowan County, Kentucky,
was jailed after defying a federal court order to issue marriage licenses to gay couples. Her action was
based on her contention that to do so would violate her religious beliefs. In his ruling, Judge David L.
Bunning of the United States District Court stated, “If you give people the opportunity to choose which
orders they follow, that’s what potentially causes problems.” In defense of Davis, Ryan Anderson of the
Heritage Foundation wrote, “Ms. Davis felt she had to follow her conscience… That, after all, is what
religious freedom and religious accommodations are all about: creating the space for citizens to fulfill
their duties, as they understand them, to God—regardless of what the rest of us think.”
A similar conflict between religious faith and the requirements of one’s job or one’s profession may be
seen in social work practice in the following scenario:
A clinical social worker has been treating a 25-year-old man for depression and anxiety. In the fourth
session, the client reveals that he is gay, and that he has not “come out” to his family. He states that he
has been involved in a committed, monogamous relationship with another man, and is contemplating
marriage. He would like to inform his parents of this good news, but is fearful that they may angrily
reject him. He is seeking counseling around this issue. The social worker belongs to a faith tradition
that believes that homosexuality is a sin, and whose leaders have been prominent in opposing same-
sex marriage. The social worker, who had up to this point
believed that treatment was going well, is concerned that his
own religiously based objections to homosexuality will interfere
with his ability to provide unbiased mental health treatment
services. The social worker contemplates informing the client
that he will have to transfer him to another therapist.
Case Study – Freedom vs. Duty in Clinical Social Work - Page 1 of 3

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. In what ways is role morality evident or not evident in the case of Kim Davis? Explain. Do you
think role morality would be ethically permissible in this situation? Why or why not?
2. In what ways is role morality evident or not evident in the case of the social worker? Explain. Do
you think role morality would be ethically permissible in this situation? Why or why not?
3. Do you think mental health providers should be able to decline to provide services to
individuals whose lifestyle they find morally wrong? Should clinicians have the freedom to
select who they wish to treat on the basis of their own values or beliefs? Why or why not?
4. Is it fair to a client if mental health services are provided by a social worker who harbors
animosity or condemnation toward the client on the basis of the client’s sexual orientation?
Would the client be better served by a clinician who did not harbor such beliefs? Why or why
not?
5. Should clients be asked to identify their sexual orientation upon admission to mental health
facilities so that appropriate provider assignments may be made? If the client does not divulge
that he or she is gay until treatment has begun, does it risk harm to the client if a transfer to
another therapist is made? On the other hand, does it risk harm to the client to continue work
with a clinician who has antipathy toward him on the basis of his sexual orientation? Explain
your reasoning.
6. What should be done in cases where it is not possible to refer the client in the above scenario
to another therapist due to limited staffing options, such as in rural mental health clinics?
Explain your reasoning.
7. In the Davis case, officials of the Mormon Church asserted that the duty to obey the law
supersedes any religious objections that Mormon county clerks may have to gay marriage. Do
you think requirements included in the National Association of Social Workers Code of Ethics to
advocate for oppressed minority groups outweigh sincere religious objections that may be held
by some social workers? Why or why not?
Resources:
Code of Ethics of the National Association of Social Workers
http://socialworkers.org/pubs/code/default.asp
Issues and ethics in the helping professions
http://www.worldcat.org/title/issues-and-ethics-in-the-helping-professions/oclc/36621768
Clerk in Kentucky chooses jail over deal on same-sex marriage
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/04/us/kim-davis-same-sex-marriage.html
We don’t need Kim Davis to be in jail
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/07/opinion/we-dont-need-kim-davis-to-be-in-jail.html
Case Study – Freedom vs. Duty in Clinical Social Work - Page 2 of 3

Page 3:
Mormons say duty to law on same-sex marriage trumps faith
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/us/mormons-still-against-same-sex-unions-take-a-stand-
against-kim-davis.html
Author:
Mitch Sudolsky, MSSW, LCSW
School of Social Work
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Freedom vs. Duty in Clinical Social Work - Page 3 of 3

