Page 1:
Approaching the Presidency Roosevelt & Taft
Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States from 1901-1909, embodied what many scholars
typically refer to as the ‘stewardship presidency.’ In the words of Roosevelt, it is the president’s “duty
to do anything that the needs of the nation demanded unless such action was forbidden by the
Constitution or by the laws.” Under Roosevelt’s expansionist view, anything the president does is
considered acceptable unless it is expressly forbidden by the Constitution or laws passed by Congress.
Roosevelt believed he served the people, not just the government. He took many actions as president
that stretched the limits of the executive branch, including the creation of national parks without
regard for states’ jurisdiction and fostering revolt in Colombia to establish the Panama Canal.
On the other hand, William Howard Taft, President of the United States from 1909-1913, embodied
what many scholars refer to as a ‘strict constructionist’ model of the presidency. Under this approach,
unless the Constitution or Congress explicitly grants a certain power, the president does not have the
right to act. In Taft’s words, “the President can exercise no power which cannot be fairly and
reasonably traced to some specific grant of power or justly implied and included within such express
grant as proper and necessary to its exercise.”
While Roosevelt expanded federal power in many areas, Taft felt many of these actions were legal
overreaches. For example, as a “trust-buster” Roosevelt differentiated between ‘good’ trusts and ‘bad’
trusts, using his expanded powers as president to make this distinction unilaterally. He made a
‘gentlemen’s agreement’ with U.S. Steel and told them that the American government would not
attack their corporation as a monopoly since he believed the company was working in the interests of
the American people. Roosevelt did not, however, pass any legislation or make any binding orders to
this effect. Taft took a more legalistic view and later, as president, directed his attorney general to file
an anti-trust lawsuit against U.S. Steel. Roosevelt took Taft’s actions as a personal attack upon
Roosevelt’s presidency and positions.
Although Taft continued many of Roosevelt’s policies, he was inclined to look at the facts of the
situation and make a choice based on evidence. Roosevelt, on the other hand, was more inclined to do
what he felt was “right.” Their disagreements, which hinged on the grey areas of the legal and the
ethical, ultimately propelled the break within the Republican Party during the 1912 elections.
Case Study – Approaching the Presidency: Roosevelt & Taft - Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. What differences do you see between Roosevelt’s and Taft’s views of their ethical
responsibilities as president?
2. How did Roosevelt and Taft each negotiate the line between law and ethics?
3. Between Roosevelt and Taft, do you think one demonstrated overconfidence bias more than
the other? Explain.
4. In the case of U.S. Steel, whose actions caused more harm: Roosevelt by making an informal
agreement, or Taft by violating that agreement? Explain.
5. Whose approach to the U.S. presidency, Taft’s or Roosevelt’s, do you think is preferable in light
of both legal and ethical considerations? Why?
6. Can you think of an example of another president or world leader whose approach to
leadership is similar to either Roosevelt or Taft? How does this leader’s approach affect his/her
political actions?
Resources:
The Constitutional Presidency
http://www.worldcat.org/title/constitutional-presidency/oclc/263497942
The Evolving Presidency: Landmark Documents, 1787-2010
http://www.worldcat.org/title/evolving-presidency-landmark-documents-1787-2015/oclc/911004600
Author:
Shannon O’Brien, Ph.D.
Department of Government
College of Liberal Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Approaching the Presidency: Roosevelt & Taft - Page 2 of 2

