Page 1:
Myanmar Amber
Amber is a resin material that is formed from fossilized conifer tree sap during years of constant
pressure and heat. This yellow to reddish-brown translucent material has been used in a number of
ways, including to make jewelry, in Egyptian burials, and in the healing arts. Amber also plays an
invaluable role in research. In some cases, amber contains inclusions, such as insects, whole or parts of
animals, and plants that are trapped and preserved. The ability to hold a piece of history untouched by
time has resulted in a number of scientific discoveries and advances such as feathers on a non-avian
dinosaur dated 99 million years ago and the biosynthesis of gene clusters for novel antibiotics.
One of the oldest amber deposits in the world, dating back 100 million years, is located in the Northern
region of Myanmar. Myanmar amber is plentiful, high quality and contains inclusions within the resin.
The mining of these amber specimens in Myanmar is the center of many legitimate and blackmarket
sales to university researchers and private collectors alike. Over the last ten years, more than one
billion dollars in legal revenue has been generated from the mining and sale of amber.
Myanmar is a small southeast Asian country that contains about 130 diverse ethnic groups recognized
by the government. There is no official state religion but the Myanmar government favors the majority
Theravada Buddhism population. This favoritism has created ethnic and religious conflicts resulting in
government-enforced discrimination. For example, the government has made it difficult for Christian
and Islamic groups to gain permission to repair or build new places of worship. The Kachin
Independence Army, which includes ethnic minorities who live in the northern Kachin and surrounding
regions of Myanmar, has been in armed conflict with the Myanmar government for the restoration of
minority ethnic groups' rights.
For many years this mining area has been protected by the Kachin Independence Army. However, in
2017 the Myanmar government dropped leaflets from helicopters informing the population in
northern Kachin that civilians and Kachin militants who remain in the region will be considered hostile
opposition to the government military forces. The government then forced more than 5000 inhabitants
from their homes and villages, as well as from the amber mines. This hostile takeover of the profitable
Kachin amber mines ensures that amber purchases from researchers and private collectors will help
fund the government side of the Myanmar ethnic civil war.
While some researchers and universities feel as though they should refrain from making such amber
purchases, their failure to participate enables many private collectors to remove collections from the
public or to charge researchers an exorbitant fee for access.
Furthermore, many of the miners in the Kachin region, on both
sides of the conflict, are not fully aware of the value of the amber
that they are selling and are therefore being exploited by the
wholesalers who purchase from them. Myanmar classifies amber
as a gemstone, not a fossil, so it can be legally removed from the
country, unlike fossils that have restrictions on removal.
Case Study – Myanmar Amber - Page 1 of 3

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. If you were a university scientist, how would you decide whether it is ethical for you to buy
amber from Myanmar?
a. If you took a deontological approach, what would your reasoning look like? What moral
principles would you take into account?
b. If you took a utilitarian approach to answering this question, what would your reasoning
look like? What facts would you weigh in making the decision?
2. In deciding whether it is ethical for you to buy amber from Myanmar, do you need to guard
against the self-serving bias unduly affecting your decision? If so, how would you go about
guarding against it have a deleterious impact?
3. Are there other cognitive biases and heuristics that might adversely affect your moral reasoning
if you are not careful? Which ones?
4. Are you aware of comparable situations around the world where individuals and corporations
that wish to be moral buyers should be similarly wary, knowing that their purchase price might
aid the seller’s bad acts? Is this ever a consideration that buyers should take into account? Is it
always a consideration that buyers should take in to account?
5. What can scientists considering the morality of trading in Myanmar amber learn from the
debate over “conflict minerals” in Africa?
Resources:
Gammon, Katharine, “The Human Cost of Amber,” The Atlantic, Aug. 2, 2019.
https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2019/08/amber-fossil-supply-chain-has-dark-human-
cost/594601/
Grimaldi, David, “Amber,” Current Biology Magazine. https://www.cell.com/current-
biology/pdf/S0960-9822(19)31097-8.pdf
Greshko, Michael, “Ancient Bird Foot Found in Amber Has Bizarrely Long Toes,” National Geographic,
July 11, 2019. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2019/07/fossil-bird-in-amber-has-
unusually-long-toes/
Lawton, Graham, “Blood Amber: The Exquisite Trove of Fossils Fueling War in Myanmar,” NewScientist,
May 1, 2019. https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg24232280-600-blood-amber-the-exquisite-
trove-of-fossils-fuelling-war-in-myanmar/
Nelson, Alexandrea, “The Materiality of Morality: Conflict Minerals,” Utah Law Review, 2014: 1, p. 219
(2014). https://dc.law.utah.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1121&context=ulr
Case Study – Myanmar Amber - Page 2 of 3

Page 3:
Sokol, Joshua, “Troubled Treasure,” Science, May 23, 2019.
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/05/fossils-burmese-amber-offer-exquisite-view-dinosaur-
times-and-ethical-minefield
Thiha, “Myanmar’s New Gold Mine is Dinosaur Amber, July 11, 2018. https://consult-
myanmar.com/2018/07/11/myanmars-new-gold-mine-is-dinosaur-amber/
Xing, Linda et al., “A Feathered Dinosaur Tail with Primitive Plumage Trapped in Mid-Cretaceous
Amber,” Current Biology, 26: 24, pl. 3352 (Dec. 2016).
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982216311939?via%3Dihub
“Dodging Rumour and Insurgency: The Hunt for Burmese Amber Goes to the Heart of Myanmar’s
Turbulent North,” Financial Post, Jan. 26, 2017.
https://business.financialpost.com/commodities/mining/dodging-rumour-and-insurgency-the-hunt-
for-burmese-amber-goes-to-the-heart-of-myanmars-turbulent-north
“It is Time to Bring Global Attention to the Trade in Burmese Amber,” NewScientist, May 1, 2019.
https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg24232283-300-it-is-time-to-bring-global-attention-to-the-
trade-in-burmese-amber/
Author:
Chris Apgar and Robert Prentice
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Myanmar Amber - Page 3 of 3

