Page 1:
Pardoning Nixon
On August 9, 1974, Richard Nixon resigned the presidency in the wake of the Watergate scandal and
the release of the ‘smoking gun’ tape that could have indicted him for involvement in criminal activity
while president. Following resignation, many Americans were angry with Nixon and also suspicious of
Gerald Ford as he stepped into the presidential role. Nixon soon became extremely ill. On August 15,
1974, he was admitted to Bethesda Naval Hospital and diagnosed with viral pneumonia. One account
suggests he was admitted with a recurrence of phlebitis. Nixon had a history of phlebitis, which can be
fatal even if treated.
On September 8, 1974, President Ford issued a full and absolute pardon of Nixon for all offenses
against the United States, making Nixon immune from any arrest, investigation, or imprisonment from
his involvement in Watergate. The pardon infuriated many Americans. Suspicions arose of a possible
deal between Ford and Nixon in exchange for Ford’s prior nomination to vice president. All parties
denied any such deal and no evidence in support of these allegations ever surfaced.
With the Watergate scandal consuming the nation, Ford signaled that he wanted to refocus the public
and rebuild trust in the executive branch. He sought to move forward by concentrating on the nation’s
problems, such as ending the Vietnam War, rather than spending his entire administration dissecting
the activities of the previous president for years to come. However, as a result of the pardon, Nixon
would never be held accountable for activity widely thought to be criminal.
President Ford also believed from reports and advisors
that Nixon’s health was seriously compromised and that
his death was likely imminent. In his speech announcing
the pardon, Ford referred both to the health crisis of Nixon
as well as his own personal constitutional duty to ensure
domestic tranquility. At the time, it was impossible for
Ford to realize that Nixon would eventually recover and
live for twenty more years. Ford believed he acted in the
nation’s best interests. The public vehemently disagreed.
Case Study – Pardoning Nixon -­‐ Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. How would you describe Ford’s process of moral analysis in this situation?
2. Should Nixon have been held accountable for his behaviors without regard for his personal
health or the new administration? Why or why not?
3. While President Ford was clearly within his constitutional right to pardon Richard Nixon, do you
think Ford’s decision was justified on ethical grounds? Why or why not?
4. Can you think of some alternatives to pardoning Nixon? Explain.
5. If you were in President Ford’s position, what would you do, and why? What would be your
process of moral analysis before taking action?
Resources:
Watergate and the Resignation of Richard Nixon: Impact of a Constitutional Crisis
http://www.worldcat.org/title/watergate-­‐and-­‐the-­‐resignation-­‐of-­‐richard-­‐nixon-­‐impact-­‐of-­‐a-­‐
constitutional-­‐crisis/oclc/56535080
The Presidential Pardon Power
http://www.worldcat.org/title/presidential-­‐pardon-­‐power/oclc/294935761
31 Days: Gerald Ford, the Nixon Pardon, and a Government in Crisis
http://www.worldcat.org/title/31-­‐days-­‐gerald-­‐ford-­‐the-­‐nixon-­‐pardon-­‐and-­‐a-­‐government-­‐in-­‐
crisis/oclc/84656942
Author:
Shannon O’Brien, Ph.D.
Department of Government
College of Liberal Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Pardoning Nixon -­‐ Page 2 of 2

