Page 1:
Reporting on Robin Williams
When actor Robin Williams took his life in August of 2014, major news organizations covered the story
in great detail. Most major news outlets reported on Marin County Sheriff’s Lt. Keith Boyd’s press
conference, which revealed graphic details from the coroner’s report about the methods Williams
used. While there was great interest on the part of the public in finding out what happened, many
argued that reporting too much detail about the suicide violated the family’s privacy.
Indeed, many of Robin Williams’s fans posted on Facebook, Twitter, and other social networks to
express their objections to the media treatment of the suicide, urging reporters to respect the family’s
right to grieve in peace. Several members of the mental health community also took issue with the
detailed reports. Paul Farmer, chief executive of the mental health charity Mind, wrote to CNN that
“When a media report describes clear details of unusual methods of suicide and essentially gives a
“how to” guide—the danger is it can make suicide seem like a more accessible action to take.” Some
journalists expressed similar viewpoints, criticizing the reports as a clear violation of media ethics.
According to the Press Complaints Commission, “When reporting suicide, care should be taken to avoid
excessive detail about the method used.”
Yet other journalists argued that the primary responsibility of the media was to report the story
truthfully and factually. In an op-­‐ed in the LA Times, Andrew Klavan wrote, “The manner of Williams’
death is public information. Journalists should report it as long as it remains of interest to the public. It
is not a journalist’s job to protect us from the ugly facts.” Klavan argued that the journalist’s duty is not
to do good or be wise, but to report the whole story, which may in fact be a part of a larger story
unfolding elsewhere. Sheriff Boyd similarly defended his own actions by stating that he had a duty to
report the details as part of the public record.
In an interview with Today, Williams’s daughter Zelda
discussed how her father never sought to hide his problems,
mentioning his openness about struggling with alcoholism.
She stated, “I think that one of the things that is changing,
that is wonderful, is that people are finally starting to
approach talking about illnesses that people can’t immediately
see…He didn’t like people feeling like the things that were
hard for them they should go through alone.”
Case Study – Reporting on Robin Williams -­‐ Page 1 of 3

Page 2:
Discussion Questions:
1. According to the video, systematic moral analysis (SMA) first requires identifying the problems
in a situation. In this case, who was harmed and how? You may reference the list of moral rules
in the transcript of the narration below.
2. The second step of SMA requires asking who is responsible. Is Sheriff Boyd responsible? The
journalists? Anyone else? How do their role-­‐related responsibilities relate to the harm caused?
3. Third in the process of SMA is to consider whether or not the action can be justified. Do you
think the role-­‐related responsibilities of Sheriff Boyd or the journalists justified their actions?
Why or why not? What alternative ways of reporting Robin Williams’s suicide would have
caused less harm?
4. Finally, if you had been in the position of Sheriff Boyd or the journalists, what do you think
would have been the ethically ideal action to take?
5. Would the journalists have harmed the public by not reporting the “whole truth?” In other
words, were they ethically required to report the details, as argued by Klavan? Explain your
reasoning.
6. Do the media have a responsibility to report suicide differently from other kinds of news? Why
or why not? What if it leads to more suicide? What if reporting these details would lead to
more awareness for mental illness?
7. When someone becomes a celebrity, do they no longer have the same right to privacy? Why or
why not? Are the moral rules different for someone who makes a career in the public eye?
Explain.
Case Study – Reporting on Robin Williams -­‐ Page 2 of 3

Page 3:
Resources:
What media got wrong on Robin Williams' suicide
http://www.cnn.com/2014/08/14/opinion/robin-­‐williams-­‐suicide-­‐media/
Newspapers got it wrong in their reporting of Robin Williams’ death
http://www.thedrum.com/opinion/2014/08/13/newspapers-­‐got-­‐it-­‐wrong-­‐their-­‐reporting-­‐robin-­‐
williams-­‐death
The truth -­‐-­‐ the whole truth -­‐-­‐ on Robin Williams’ death
http://www.latimes.com/opinion/opinion-­‐la/la-­‐ol-­‐robin-­‐williams-­‐details-­‐of-­‐death-­‐20140819-­‐story.html
Robin Williams’ daughter Zelda on life with dad, continuing his charity
http://www.today.com/popculture/robin-­‐williams-­‐daughter-­‐zelda-­‐life-­‐without-­‐dad-­‐continuing-­‐his-­‐
charity-­‐t5421
Author:
Andrew Carlson, Ph.D., M.F.A.
Department of Theatre & Dance
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Reporting on Robin Williams -­‐ Page 3 of 3

