Page 1:
Something Fishy at the Paralympics
Some of sports’ most inspiring and heart-warming stories have come from the Special Olympics (for
athletes with intellectual disabilities) and the Paralympics (for athletes with intellectual impairments
and visual or physical disabilities). The Paralympic games are held in parallel with the Olympics every
four years and have become a very big deal. Sports Illustrated reports that “Paralympic sport has
grown into big business, with countries and sponsors pouring in millions of dollars to fund and
promote athletes whose stories highlight the best of humanity.”1 Australian Paralympians are
sometimes provided “tens of thousands of dollars in government funding and other perks, including
college scholarships, vehicles, and housing.”2 In the 2020 Paralympics, U.S. athletes were slated to
receive $37,500 for each gold medal they won.
Unfortunately, sometimes Paralympians cheat much like regular Olympians have been known to do—
they take illicit drugs3 or they drive their blood pressure up (“boosting”) to drive heart rate and
improve performance.4 And, unsurprisingly, the Russians systematically cheat in the Paralympics just as
they do in the traditional Olympics.5 But the most significant cheating involves gaming the
International Paralympic Committee’s (IPC’s) classification system.
The IPC classifies the disabilities of competitors in order to provide a structure for competition. Fair
competition thrives only if athletes have similar levels of disabilities, so athletes are grouped into
classes based on “how much their impairment
affects fundamental activities in each specific
sport and discipline.”6
Obviously, by pretending to have a more serious
disability than they actually do, athletes could
convince officials to group them with athletes of
lesser abilities. And there is evidence that this has
happened. For example, among the wrongdoing7:
• Swimmers tape their arms for days, removing the tape just before classification. Because of the
taping, they are unable to fully extend their arms.
• Athletes arrive for the classification in a wheelchair when they do not otherwise use
wheelchairs, or wearing braces that they normally do not wear.
• Athletes submerge in cold water or roll in snow soon before classification to worsen muscle
tone.
• Athletes intentionally perform below their ability (“tanking”) in assessment races.
Case Study – Something Fishy at the Paralympics - Page 1 of 5

Page 2:
• Remarkably, even the shortening and removal of limbs has reportedly occurred.
The most infamous example of Paralympic cheating was by Spain’s basketball team at the 2000 Sydney
Paralympics: none of the 12 players was mentally disabled as represented.8 Recently several
Paralympians, especially Para-swimmers, have claimed that cheating the classification system is
“epidemic.”9
After the Spanish basketball team was finally punished in 2017, the IPC removed basketball as a
Paralympic sport until officials could prove to the IPC’s satisfaction that they had the classification
problem under control.10
And, after believable allegations of widespread classification cheating among Australian
Paralympians,11 Australia has launched an online course that is mandatory for all its Paralympic
athletes. The course outlines the classification process and requirements for all staff, coaches and
athletes, explains penalties for noncompliance, and trains everyone on ethical decision making.12
At this time, the 2020 Tokyo Paralympics, along with the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, have been postponed
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Whether or not the increased visibility (and awareness) of Paralympic
cheating changes the way these games are played in the future remains to be seen.
Case Study – Something Fishy at the Paralympics - Page 2 of 5

Page 3:
Discussion Questions
1. Are you surprised to learn that some of these inspiring Paralympians are cheating? Why or why
not?
2. Why do you think some Paralympians cheat?
3. What psychological biases, social pressures or rationalizations might these athletes employ to
support their decision to cheat? Explain.
4. Why do we seem to have cheating in the Paralympics, but not the Special Olympics?
a. Can the video on “incentive gaming” shed some light on this question?
5. The coach who recruited the 2000 Spanish Paralympic basketball team has reportedly built a
fortune by collecting state money aimed to support disabled athletes.13 Does the self-serving
bias play a role in motivating cheating? How so? By the coaches? By the athletes? Explain.
6. It has been reported that the consciences of the 12 non-disabled semi-professional Spanish
basketball players who entered the Sydney Paralympics of 2000 (and won the gold medal) were
eased by the President of Spain’s Federation for Mentally Disabled Sports. He told them that
fake Paralympians were commonplace in every sport at the Paralympics.14 Does this sound like
the conformity bias in action? Why or why not?
a. Is this assertion defensible intellectually, or is it just a massive rationalization?
7. It has been suggested that cheating by athletes in the Paralympics reinforces a stereotype held
by many that people often pretend to be disabled in order to qualify for government payments
and are therefore cheats?15 Is reinforcement of this false narrative a damaging result of the
cheating scandal? Why or why not?
a. Do you think this negative outcome was foreseen by the wrongdoers?
b. Can you think of other collateral impacts?
8. It has been argued that because the Paralympics are about winning (just like all sports) and that
sometimes people in other sports cheat, it is no big deal that Paralympians cheat. Indeed,
“[s]ome Paralympians and disability-rights speakers take doping scandals as positive news. They
say it proves disabled people can achieve the same things as anyone else, including cheating.
People, they argue, can identify more with a role model who has made mistakes.”16 Do you find
this a convincing argument? Explain.
9. Paralympian gold medal winner Bethany Woodward gave back her gold medal in the relays
because one of her teammates was insufficiently disabled and therefore gave her team an
unfair advantage. Woodward said, “Paralympic sport is about disabled people pushing
themselves and overcoming their disability. Handing back this medal will mean all the medals I
Case Study – Something Fishy at the Paralympics - Page 3 of 5

Page 4:
won are to do with me, my cerebral palsy and my strength.”17 This act has been mocked by Jim
Moore, who wrote: “Para sport is either about inspiration porn, and giving ‘special people’ a
little something to do in between putting us all back in a box. Or it’s about what all other sport
is about: winning.”18 Do you agree with Moore? Do you admire Woodward? Both? Neither?
Support your position.
10. Athletes like Bethany Woodward and U.S. Para-swimmer Jessica Long have been trying to call
attention to cheating in the Paralympics. But they have been criticized by fellow Para-athletes
for causing a furor that threatens to tear the sport apart and thereby damage it irrevocably.19
Some think that Woodward and Long should just shut up. Do you? Why or why not?
11. Are the steps being taken by the IPC (banning basketball until the sport can clean up its act) and
individual countries like Australia (with its online training course) necessary? Are they
sufficient? Explain your reasoning.
Author:
Robert Prentice, J.D.
Department of Business, Government and Society
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
End Notes:
1 Robert Sanchez, Dirty Pool at the Paralympics, Sports Illustrated, March 2020, at
https://www.si.com/olympics/2020/03/03/paralympiccheating.
2 Robert Sanchez, Dirty Pool at the Paralympics, Sports Illustrated, March 2020, at
https://www.si.com/olympics/2020/03/03/paralympiccheating.
3 Roger Collier, Most Paralympians Inspire, But Others Cheat, Canadian Medical Association Journal,
Sept. 9, 2008, at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2527388/.
4 Kevin Carpenter, The Dark Side of the Paralympics: Cheating Through “Boosting,” LawInSport, Aug.
27, 2012, at https://www.lawinsport.com/more/blogs/kevin-carpenter/item/the-dark-side-of-the-
paralympics-cheating-through-boosting.
5 Rebecca Ruiz, Russia Is Banned from Paralympics, Again, for Doping, New York Times, Jan. 29,
2018, at https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/29/sports/paralympics-russia-doping.html.
6 International Paralympic Committee, November 2015 IPC Athlete Classification Code (2015).
7 Robert Sanchez, Dirty Pool at the Paralympics, Sports Illustrated, March 2020, at
https://www.si.com/olympics/2020/03/03/paralympiccheating.
8 Simon Tomlinson, Are These the Biggest Cheats in Sporting History? Staggering Story of the Healthy
Spanish Basketball Team Who Pretended to Be Mentally Handicapped to Win Paralympic Gold, The
Case Study – Something Fishy at the Paralympics - Page 4 of 5

Page 5:
Daily Mail, Oct. 14, 2013, at https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2458715/Spanish-basketball-
team-pretended-disabled-win-Paralympic-gold.html
9 Robert Sanchez, Dirty Pool at the Paralympics, Sports Illustrated, March 2020, at
https://www.si.com/olympics/2020/03/03/paralympiccheating.
10 Craig Lord, Jessica Long on the Poison Pool in Paralympic Swimming Where ‘Classification Cheats
Prosper,’ Swimming World Magazine, March 5, 2020, at
https://www.swimmingworldmagazine.com/news/jessica-long-on-the-poison-pool-in-paralympic-
swimming-where-classification-cheats-prosper/.
11 Scot Spits, Misrepresenting Disability on a Par with Doping: Paralympics, Australia, Sydney
Morning Herald, July 31, 2019, at https://www.smh.com.au/sport/misrepresenting-disability-on-a-par-
with-doping-paralympics-australia-20190731-p52cm2.html.
12 Chris Dutton, Paralympics Australia Launches Crackdown on Cheats, Canberra Times, May 29,
2019, at https://www.canberratimes.com.au/story/6188557/para-sport-launch-cheating-
crackdown/#gsc.tab=0.
13 Alex Dunham, ‘Stop Playing Well, They’ll Know You’re Not Disabled,’ The Local, Oct. 11, 2013, at
https://www.thelocal.es/20131011/stop-playing-well-theyll-know-youre-not-disabled.
14 Alex Dunham, ‘Stop Playing Well, They’ll Know You’re Not Disabled,’ The Local, Oct. 11, 2013, at
https://www.thelocal.es/20131011/stop-playing-well-theyll-know-youre-not-disabled.
15 James Moore, The Paralympics Cheating Scandal Proves that British Para-sport is a Victim of Its
Own Success, The Independent, Oct. 31, 2017, at https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/paralympics-
cheating-scandal-british-athletes-success-disabilities-classification-a8029866.html.
16 BBC, Paralympics: Olympic Implications, at
http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/sport/aspects/paralympics.shtml.
17 Paul Grant, ‘I’m Handing Back My Medal’: Is Paralympic Sport Classification Fit for Purpose?,
BBC.com, Sept. 18, 2017, at https://www.bbc.com/sport/disability-sport/41253174.
18 James Moore, Why is Anyone Shocked that Paralympians Have Been Accused of Cheating?, The
Independent, Sept. 23, 2017, at https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/paralympics-para-athletes-
doping-cheating-classification-paralympians-a7962796.html.
19 Robert Sanchez, Dirty Pool at the Paralympics, Sports Illustrated, March 2020, at
https://www.si.com/olympics/2020/03/03/paralympiccheating.
Case Study – Something Fishy at the Paralympics - Page 5 of 5

