Page 1:
Teaching Blackface: A Lesson on Stereotypes
In 2014, Alan Barron, a white middle school history teacher who taught for 36 years in Monroe,
Michigan, was placed on administrative leave a few weeks before his retirement. Barron’s
administration viewed his history lesson as racist. While teaching about racial segregation laws during
the Jim Crow era, Barron played a video showing a white entertainer in blackface. During the
nineteenth and early twentieth century, white actors commonly painted their faces with makeup to
depict black individuals. Barron explained that the purpose of the video was to show how stereotypes
of African-Americans were portrayed at one point in American history. During the lesson, an assistant
principal who was observing the classroom demanded that Barron stop the video because she
“concluded that Barron’s lesson about how entertainers used to be racist was itself racist.” Barron was
subsequently suspended.
Many parents spoke out against Barron’s suspension. Adrienne Aaron, whose African-American
daughter was in Barron’s eighth grade history class at the time, said that her daughter was not
offended by the lesson and thought that the subject needed to be discussed. Aaron stated, “[My
daughter] was more offended that they stopped the video…History is history. We need to educate our
kids to see how far we’ve come in America. How is that racism?”
After two weeks on leave, the district allowed Barron to return to his classroom. The
superintendent stated, “The teacher in question was placed on paid leave to give the district time to
fully consider what occurred in this classroom. As a result of
incorrect information, a highly respected and loved teacher,
and one who has done much for his students and the
community, has had to endure a public airing of what should
have ended through a district discussion.” Barron was set to
retire soon after being reinstated.
Discussion Questions:
1. Do you think Mr. Barron was demonstrating moral awareness or a lack of moral awareness by
showing the video of the minstrel show? Explain your position.
2. Do you agree with the assistant principal’s decision to shut down the video during the
observation? Was she demonstrating moral awareness or lack of moral awareness? Explain
your position.
3. Should Mr. Barron have warned his students that some of them could have been offended by
the racism portrayed in the video? Why or why not? Is it ever necessary for teachers to provide
disclaimers about content that they use in their classrooms? Explain.
4. Should teachers be prevented from showing examples (books, films, photos, etc.) of historical
events and/or practices that are considered racially insensitive by today’s standards? Why or
why not?
Case Study – Teaching Blackface: A Lesson on Stereotypes - Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
5. What do you think is the best way to teach about stereotypes? Is it possible to do this without
offending someone? Explain.
6. Many people viewed political correctness as the main issue of this case. Can you think of an
example in which political correctness promoted ethical behavior? How about an example in
which political correctness led to unethical behavior?
Resources:
Teacher’s lesson about racism offends his bosses
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2014-06-05/news/ct-kass-met-0605-20140605_1_history-school-
administrator-segregation
The Daily Caller – Middle School Teacher Suspended for Showing Video About White Actors Wearing
Blackface
http://news.yahoo.com/middle-school-teacher-suspended-showing-video-white-actors-
122027921.html
Monroe News – Monroe Teacher Suspended Over Black History Lesson
http://www.monroenews.com/news/2014/may/30/monroe-teacher-alan-barron-suspended/
Community comments on Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/monroenews/posts/10152456292741692
Teaching Tolerance – Do’s and Don’ts of Teaching Black History
http://www.tolerance.org/article/dos-and-donts-teaching-black-history
Monroe News – Monroe Teacher Reinstated After Segregation Lesson
http://www.monroenews.com/news/2014/jun/01/al-barron-reinstated-mps-teacher/
Author:
Christina Bain, Ph.D.
Department of Art and Art History
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Teaching Blackface: A Lesson on Stereotypes - Page 2 of 2

