Page 1:
Welfare Reform
In 1996, Democratic President Bill Clinton and a Republican-­‐led Congress passed The Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA), also known as the “Welfare
Reform Act.” This bill changed how government-­‐funded welfare operated in the United States.
PRWORA reduced the amount of federal spending for low-­‐income families, placed a limit on the
number of years a person could receive federal financial assistance, and required recipients to work
within two years of receiving benefits. It also included legislation that limited the funding available to
unmarried parents under the age of 18, enhanced legal enforcement of child support, and restricted
funding for immigrants. Republican supporters believed these provisions would curb the number of
out-­‐of-­‐wedlock births.
The bill ignited a decades-­‐long debate about individual responsibility versus social responsibility and
the role of the government in directly alleviating poverty. On the one hand, the bill was heralded as an
important step toward helping welfare recipients achieve self-­‐reliance and employment. Through this
bill, Clinton aimed to “end welfare as we know it” by creating job opportunities that would help stop a
cycle of poverty and dependency. Republican Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich and his colleagues in
Congress pressured Clinton to make the bill even more austere. They argued that reducing welfare
funding reinforced core American values of individual responsibility, hard work, independence, and
free enterprise.
Critics of the bill argued that it negatively affected the most vulnerable people in society. Several
members of Clinton’s administration even resigned as a result of the bill. One of these detractors,
Peter Edelman, argued that welfare reform would not solve the problem, but rather drive millions
more people into poverty, many of them single mothers and their children. During the debate, Senator
Edward Kennedy called the bill “legislative child abuse.” From this perspective, the government was
essentially abdicating its responsibility to care for children and impoverished people who are
systemically disadvantaged.
The bill was effective for getting people off of welfare at first, in part due to a booming economy in the
late 1990s. By 2000, welfare caseloads were at their lowest level in 30 years. However, wages tended
to be barely above the poverty line and did not provide long term financial stability. Financial instability
was exacerbated by the economic downturn in 2008. In a 2016 report from the Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities examining the effects of PRWORA and related policies, research showed several
findings: “Employment increases…were modest and
faded over time;” “Stable employment…[was] the
exception, not the norm;” “Most recipients…never found
work even after participation in work programs…;” “The
large majority of individuals…remained poor, and some
became poorer;” and “Voluntary employment programs
can significantly increase employment without the
negative impacts of ending basic assistance…”
Case Study – Welfare Reform -­‐ Page 1 of 3

Page 2:
The government’s role in supporting the poor through direct aid remains an active debate in the U.S.
today.
Discussion Questions:
1. In this case, who favors the individualistic fundamental moral unit? Who favors the community-­‐
oriented fundamental moral unit? Which viewpoint do you find the most compelling and why?
2. Regardless of your own political affiliation, do you think governments or societies have an
obligation to care for disadvantaged or lower-­‐income families? Why or why not?
3. Do you think everyone in your home country has equal opportunities to succeed in society?
Why or why not? Do you think success is the sole responsibility of the individual or does
government have a role to play? Explain your position.
4. How might individuals raised with different notions of the fundamental moral unit respond
differently to the Welfare Reform Act?
5. How might awareness of the fundamental moral unit help us to better understand differences
between political parties?
Case Study – Welfare Reform -­‐ Page 2 of 3

Page 3:
Resources:
Welfare’s Changing Face
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-­‐srv/politics/special/welfare/welfare.htm
Was Welfare Reform Successful?
http://www.usi.edu/business/cashel/331/welfare%20reform.pdf
Clinton to Sign Bill Overhauling Welfare
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-­‐srv/politics/special/welfare/stories/wf080196.htm
Renewing America
http://www.newsweek.com/renewing-­‐america-­‐184562
Welfare Limits Left Poor Adrift as Recession Hit
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/08/us/welfare-­‐limits-­‐left-­‐poor-­‐adrift-­‐as-­‐recession-­‐hit.html
Did Welfare Reform Work for Everyone? A Look at Young Single Mothers
http://www.frbsf.org/economic-­‐research/publications/economic-­‐letter/2009/august/welfare-­‐reform-­‐
single-­‐mothers/
20 Years Later, Welfare Overhaul Resonates for Families and Candidates
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/02/us/20-­‐years-­‐later-­‐welfare-­‐overhaul-­‐resonates-­‐for-­‐families-­‐and-­‐
candidates.html
Work Requirements Don’t Cut Poverty, Evidence Shows
http://www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-­‐and-­‐inequality/work-­‐requirements-­‐dont-­‐cut-­‐poverty-­‐
evidence-­‐shows
Author:
Andrew Carlson, Ph.D., M.F.A.
Department of Theatre & Dance
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Welfare Reform -­‐ Page 3 of 3

