Page 1:
Banning Burkas: Freedom or Discrimination?
In September 2010, the French Parliament passed a bill prohibiting people from concealing their
faces in public areas. While this law applied to all citizens and all forms of face covering, it became
known as France’s “burka bill” because the rhetoric surrounding the bill targeted Muslim women
who wore burkas—religious garments covering the face and body—in public.
French lawmakers argued that the law was important for the separation of church and state and
for the emancipation of women. Similar to the 2004 bill that outlawed the use of conspicuous
religious symbols in public schools, including Muslim headscarves and Christian crosses, this law
sought to further remove religious expression and iconography from public spaces in France. Some
legislators argued that the burka was a harmful symbol of gender inequality that forced women to
assume a subservient status to men in public. According to them, the law freed women from a
discriminatory, patriarchal subculture.
However, some in the French Muslim community saw the bill as an infringement of religious
freedom and an act of cultural imperialism. They argued that French legislators were imposing
their idea of gender equality onto their culture. Many of them, including some women, argued that
wearing burkas actually emancipated women from the physical objectification so common in
Western culture. A number of women protested the bill by dressing in burkas and going to the
offices of lawmakers who supported the legislation. Other reports from individual women
suggested that the law created a more hostile atmosphere for Islamic women in France. One of
these women critiqued the bill, stating, “My quality of
life has seriously deteriorated since the ban…the
politicians claimed they were liberating us; what
they've done is to exclude us from the social sphere.”
The law was challenged in 2014 and taken to the
European Court of Human Rights. The court upheld
the legality of the law.
Discussion Questions:
1. Lawmakers might argue that they were creating a more pluralistic society by banning all
forms of religious expression in public places, whereas detractors might argue that the ban
does just the opposite. Which side do you agree with, and why?
2. Should all religious practices be tolerated in a free society? Are there limits to what you
think should be allowed? Explain your reasoning.
Case Study – Banning Burkas: Freedom or Discrimination? -­‐ Page 1 of 2

Page 2:
3. Do you think your home country should implement a ban on face coverings in public? Why
or why not?
4. Should religious garments and iconography from all faith traditions be banned in public
schools as occurred in France in 2004? Why or why not?
5. According to some accounts, the law inspired instances of people acting violently against
women who continued to wear burkas. Do the principles of separation of church and state
and the emancipation of women outweigh these consequences? Defend your position.
Resources:
France’s burqa ban: women are ‘effectively under house arrest’
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/19/battle-­‐for-­‐the-­‐burqa
France’s burka bill -­‐ background to a bitter debate
http://www.english.rfi.fr/france/20100526-­‐sarkozy-­‐and-­‐burka
France’s burka ban is a victory for tolerance
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/8444177/BurkaFranceNational-­‐
FrontMarine-­‐Le-­‐PenMuslimFadela-­‐AmaraAndre-­‐Gerinhijab.html
French Senate votes to ban Islamic full veil in public
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-­‐europe-­‐11305033
Pourquoi No Burqa?
https://www.sandala.org/blog/pourquoi-­‐no-­‐burqa
Author:
Andrew Carlson, Ph.D., M.F.A.
Department of Theatre & Dance
College of Fine Arts
The University of Texas at Austin
Case Study – Banning Burkas: Freedom or Discrimination? -­‐ Page 2 of 2

